Many patients have more than one joint arthroplasty, and studies have estimated that one in 30 people living in Australia and the United States have at least one shoulder, hip, or knee implant in situ [14, 15, 18]. Furthermore, the number of people living with more than one joint replacement is increasing at a faster pace than the number of those living with only one joint replacement [15]. We have made little headway in preventing periprosthetic joint infection (PJI), the incidence of which has remained somewhat similar over the past 15 years [14, 16, 17]. PJI affects 1% of patients with a joint implant [21]. As a result, the absolute number of patients with PJI is rising. When treating a patient with PJI, there is a 33% to 45% chance the patient will have at least one additional joint implant in situ [1, 11, 12]. The chance of experiencing a PJI in a second joint is 8% to 20% [1, 12]. We do not have a good way to assess the risk of a metachronous PJI (periprosthetic infection in patients who have previously had PJI in another joint, after a lag period) in a joint in a patient who has a PJI in the other joint. The risk appears to be higher in patients in whom the initial PJI is accompanied by systemic inflammatory response syndrome or bacteremia, in whom the PJI is caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, patients who must undergo three or more stages of resection arthroplasty, female patients, and those who have rheumatoid arthritis, all of which are nonmodifiable risk factors [1, 11, 12]. An orthopaedic surgeon might have a positive or negative impact on the chance that a subsequent PJI will develop in patients with an uninfected implant in the same bone as the infected implant.

Although we know that most metachronous PJIs are caused by the same microorganisms that led to the initial PJI, the exact route of infection is not fully understood. Many may be hematogenic, but in a patient with an uninfected implant in the same bone as the infected implant, there is also a chance of continuous infection or infection by inoculation because of surgical procedures. Given the lack of data, there are no recommendations on this matter.

We therefore asked, (1) In patients with hip and knee arthroplasties on the same side who experience a PJI of one implant, are there factors associated with the development of subsequent PJI of the other implant? (2) In this patient group, how often is the same organism responsible for both PJIs? (3) Is a shorter distance from an infected prosthetic joint to an ipsilateral prosthetic joint associated with greater odds of subsequent infection of the second joint?